Docker 101

# Objective

This learning lab introduces Docker, a common set of tools for
building, sharing and deploying __containers__. A __container__ is a
set of system services that runs an application and its dependencies
in processes whose resources are isolated from the rest of the host
system. For more information about containers, see the Containers-101
lab. You can then can put your new knowledge into practice using this
learning lab to build, deploy and optionally share your first Docker
container.

# For best results..
This is a hands on lab, but each example builds on the previous and explains *WHY* we are running the commands.
If you just skip to each command to run, without reading the text in between, you will not learn anything.

# Audience

* DevOps engineers
* Application developers
* IT teams addressing developer needs for Docker and Containers

# Content Notice

Thanks to the Cisco Live EU 2017 workshop "Introduction to Containers"
for portions of this learning lab. Further reading is available in the
excellent docker introduction at
[imapex.io](https://github.com/imapex-training/mod_adv_docker/blob/master/README.md)

# Recap

The Container-101 learning lab explained that the technology on which
containers are built is only part of the story. Containers are popular
because the tools and workflows that they offer make it easy for
developers to build, package, share, and deploy applications. Docker
is not the only set of tools designed to support containers, but it is
the most popular.

## Containers provide a way to:
* Package applications and dependencies.
* Guarantee portability and consistency of execution.
* Keep an application isolated.
* Take advantage of the isolation offered by a VM without the overhead.

## Containers ARE NOT:

1. Microservices  
Containers are often confused with __microservices__. Microservices,
which are lightweight system services, can benefit from low-cost
methods of packaging, distributing and deploying software, but they
are not the same thing as containers. Any application can be packaged
using containers; it doesn't have to be a microservice. Even a
badly-written legacy application can be packaged in a container. Using
a container doesn't magically improve an application.

2. Virtual Machines  
Containers are not VMs. Containers run entirely in user space. If
an application requires kernel extensions, kernel modules, or a
custom kernel then a container is probably not the right solution
for it.

3. Magic  
A container is a tool like other tools. It has its own limitations
and nuances and its own deployment considerations, just like any
other tool.

## Installing Docker

The __Docker engine__ runs and manages containers on a host
machine. The __Docker client tools__ interact with and control the
Docker engine. Both the Docker engine and the Docker client tools are
now distributed by default as part of many Linux distributions.

The engine and client tools are also available for download directly
from [Docker.com](http://www.docker.com).

## A Browser-Based Playground

For the hands-on sessions in this learning lab we'll use an in-browser
Docker playground called
[play-with-docker.com](http://labs.play-with-docker.com/).

The play-with-docker.com site provides access to a full VM running
Docker directly in a web browser, making it easy to work with Docker
from any device.

1. Open [play-with-docker.com](http://labs.play-with-docker.com/) in a
   browser.  
   The play-with-docker.com site displays a Captcha dialog to ensure
   that you're not a robot. Complete the Captcha to continue to
   play-with-docker.com. The play-with-docker site displays a session
   countdown and an __Add New Instance__ button.

2. Click the __Add New Instance__ button.  
   The play-with-docker.com site creates and displays a terminal
   session in the browser. The rest of this learning lab uses the
   in-browser terminal session to work with Docker.  ![Play With
   Docker Site](/posts/files/docker101/assets/images/playwithdocker1.png)

3. Confirm that Docker is available.  
   The in-browser terminal session starts up with Docker already
   installed. To confirm that Docker is available, issue the following
   command at the prompt:  
   ```
   docker -v
   ```    
   Output will look something like this:  
   ```
   Docker version 1.13.1-rc1, build 2527cfc
   ```

# Getting and Running A Docker Container

The simplest way to use Docker is to run an existing public image
that's available from [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/).

Docker Hub is a public exchange for sharing Docker containers. Other
Docker sharing sites are available, but we'll take advantage of the
fact that Docker's command-line interface searches DockerHub by
default.

To run a publicly-available Docker Container, follow these steps:

1. Search for a container named "hello-world"  
   Use the command `docker search` to find the "hello-world"" image:
![docker search
 hello-world](/posts/files/docker-101/assets/images/dockersearch.png)  
   Docker searches the public DockerHub repositories and finds the
   "hello-world" image.

We can see that Docker has found the "hello-world" image. Let's run it.

2. Run hello-world by executing this command:  
   ```
   docker run hello-world
   ```  
 ![docker run
   hello-world](/posts/files/docker-101/assets/images/dockerrun1.png)  
   Docker first checks to see whether the "hello-world" image is
   available locally. If it isn't then Docker automatically downloads
   it from DockerHub. After downloading it, Docker sets up the
   container to run locally, including ensuring its isolation from
   other processes. Once the preparations are made, Docker runs the
   image.

Congratulations! You just ran your first Docker container!

The following sections explain what just happened behind the scenes,
and how to create your own Docker images.

