# Microservices Overview Learning Lab

## Objective

This Learning Lab should give you a basic understanding of microservices, containers, and cloud-native applications.

**Completion time: 40 minutes**

## Audience

* DevOps engineers
* Application developers

## About Cloud-Native Applications

With the significant adoption of public and private cloud technologies by developers, commonalities in the infrastructure and shape of a "cloud native" application are emerging.  From an infrastructure standpoint, developers expect the following:

* The ability to access compute and storage in an on-demand manner
* The ability to deploy continuously to production
* The ability to use feature flags for enabling or disabling application functionality
* The ability to measure many aspects of application and user behaviour

To shape an application, developers should follow the [12 Factor app](http://12factor.net) guidelines. These important points are considered the "gold standard" for designing and delivering cloud-native applications.

## Summary of the Twelve Factors

For more information, see the [12 Factor app](http://12factor.net) Web site. 

* **I. Codebase** 
  
  One codebase tracked in revision control, many deploys.
* **II. Dependencies** 
  
  Explicitly declare and isolate dependencies.
* **III. Config** 
  
  Store config in the environment.
* **IV. Backing services** 
  
  Treat backing services as attached resources.
* **V. Build, release, run** 
  
  Strictly separate build and run stages.
* **VI. Processes** 
  
  Execute the app as one or more stateless processes.
* **VII. Port binding** 
  
  Export services via port binding.
* **VIII. Concurrency** 
  
  Scale out via the process model.
* **IX. Disposability** 
  
  Maximize robustness with fast startup and graceful shutdown.
* **X. Dev/prod parity** 
  
  Keep development, staging, and production as similar as possible.
* **XI. Logs** 
  
  Treat logs as event streams.
* **XII. Admin processes** 
  
  Run admin/management tasks as one-off processes.
